\input texinfo  @c -*-texinfo-*-
@c %**start of header
@setfilename gfortran.info
@set last-update January 06, 2003
@set copyrights-gfortran 1999-2003
@set version-gfortran 0.235

@include gcc-common.texi

@c This indicates that this documentation is still under development.
@c For example, if this option is set, overfull boxes are marked with
@c an ugly black square.
set DEVELOPMENT

@settitle The GNU Fortran 95 Compiler

@c Create a separate index for command line options
@defcodeindex op
@c Merge the standard indexes into a single one.
@syncodeindex fn cp
@syncodeindex vr cp
@syncodeindex ky cp
@syncodeindex pg cp
@syncodeindex tp cp

@c %**end of header

@c Use with @@smallbook.

@c %** start of document

@c Cause even numbered pages to be printed on the left hand side of
@c the page and odd numbered pages to be printed on the right hand
@c side of the page.  Using this, you can print on both sides of a
@c sheet of paper and have the text on the same part of the sheet.

@c The text on right hand pages is pushed towards the right hand
@c margin and the text on left hand pages is pushed toward the left
@c hand margin.
@c (To provide the reverse effect, set bindingoffset to -0.75in.)

@c @tex
@c \global\bindingoffset=0.75in
@c \global\normaloffset =0.75in
@c @end tex

@copying
Copyright @copyright{} @value{copyrights-gfortran} Free Software Foundation, Inc.

Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document
under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.1 or
any later version published by the Free Software Foundation; with the
Invariant Sections being ``GNU General Public License'' and ``Funding
Free Software'', the Front-Cover
texts being (a) (see below), and with the Back-Cover Texts being (b)
(see below).  A copy of the license is included in the section entitled
``GNU Free Documentation License''.

(a) The FSF's Front-Cover Text is:

     A GNU Manual

(b) The FSF's Back-Cover Text is:

     You have freedom to copy and modify this GNU Manual, like GNU
     software.  Copies published by the Free Software Foundation raise
     funds for GNU development.
@end copying

@ifinfo
@dircategory Programming
@direntry
* gfortran: (gfortran).                  The GNU Fortran 95 Compiler.
@end direntry
This file documents the use and the internals of
the GNU Fortran 95 compiler, (@command{gfortran}).

Published by the Free Software Foundation
59 Temple Place - Suite 330
Boston, MA 02111-1307 USA

@insertcopying
@end ifinfo

Contributed by Steven Bosscher (@email{s.bosscher@@gcc.gnu.org}).

@setchapternewpage odd
@titlepage
@title Using GNU Fortran 95
@sp 2
@center Steven Bosscher
@sp 3 
@center Last updated @value{last-update}
@sp 1
@center for version @value {version-gfortran}
@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
For the @value{version-gfortran} Version*
@sp 1
Published by the Free Software Foundation @*
59 Temple Place - Suite 330@*
Boston, MA 02111-1307, USA@*
@c Last printed ??ber, 19??.@*
@c Printed copies are available for $? each.@*
@c ISBN ???
@sp 1
@insertcopying
@end titlepage
@summarycontents
@contents
@page

@node Top, Copying,, (DIR)
@top Introduction
@cindex Introduction

This manual documents the use of @command{gfortran}, 
the GNU Fortran 95 compiler. You can find in this manual how to invoke
@command{gfortran}, as well as its features and incompatibilities,
and how to report bugs.

@ifset DEVELOPMENT
@emph{Warning:} This document is still under development,
and might not accurately reflect the status of the
most recent @command{gfortran}.
This compiler is still under development,
and even though efforts are made to keep this document up-to-date,
for now we will put emphasis on developing the compiler itself
rather than on writing user documentation.
@end ifset

@menu
* Copying::         GNU General Public License says
                    how you can copy and share GNU Fortran.
* GNU Free Documentation License::
		    How you can copy and share this manual.
* Funding::         How to help assure continued work for free software.
* Getting Started:: What you should know about @command{gfortran}.
* GFORTRAN and GCC::	    You can compile Fortran, C, or other programs.
* GFORTRAN and G77::     Why we choose to start from scratch.
@c * Invoking GFORTRAN::    Command options supported by @command{gfortran}.
* Compiling and Testing::
		    Need-to-knows about compiling and testing.
* Project Status::  Status of GFORTRAN, Roadmap, proposed extensions.
* Contributing::    Helping you can help.
* Standards::	    Standards supported by GFORTRAN.
* Index::	    Index of this documentation.
@end menu



@c ---------------------------------------------------------------------
@c GNU General Public License
@c ---------------------------------------------------------------------

@include gpl.texi



@c ---------------------------------------------------------------------
@c GNU Free Documentation License
@c ---------------------------------------------------------------------

@include fdl.texi



@c ---------------------------------------------------------------------
@c Funding Free Software
@c ---------------------------------------------------------------------

@include funding.texi



@c ---------------------------------------------------------------------
@c Getting Started
@c ---------------------------------------------------------------------

@node Getting Started
@chapter Getting Started

Gfortran is the GNU Fortran 95 compiler front end,
designed initially as a free replacement for,
or alternative to, the unix @command{f95} command;
@command{gfortran} is command you'll use to invoke the compiler.

Gfortran is still in an early state of development.
@command{gfortran} can generate code for most constructs and expressions,
but much work remains to be done.

When @command{gfortran} is finished,
it will do everything you expect from any decent compiler: 

@itemize @bullet
@item
Read a user's program,
stored in a file and containing instructions written
in Fortran 77, Fortran 90 or Fortran 95.
This file contains @dfn{source code}.

@item
Translate the user's program into instructions a computer
can carry out more quickly than it takes to translate the
instructions in the first
place.  The result after compilation of a program is
@dfn{machine code},
code designed to be efficiently translated and processed
by a machine such as your computer.
Humans usually aren't as good writing machine code
as they are at writing Fortran (or C++, Ada, or Java),
because is easy to make tiny mistakes writing machine code.

@item
Provide the user with information about the reasons why
the compiler is unable to create a binary from the source code.
Usually this will be the case if the source code is flawed.
When writing Fortran, it is easy to make big mistakes.
The Fortran 90 requires that the compiler can point out
mistakes to the user.
An incorrect usage of the language causes an @dfn{error message}.

The compiler will also attempt to diagnose cases where the
user's program contains a correct usage of the language,
but instructs the computer to do something questionable.
This kind of diagnostics message is called a @dfn{warning message}.

@item
Provide optional information about the translation passes
from the source code to machine code.
This can help a user of the compiler to find the cause of
certain bugs which may not be obvious in the source code,
but may be more easily found at a lower level compiler output.
It also helps developers to find bugs in the compiler itself.

@item
Provide information in the generated machine code that can
make it easier to find bugs in the program (using a debugging tool,
called a @dfn{debugger}, such as the GNU Debugger @command{gdb}). 

@item
Locate and gather machine code already generated to
perform actions requested by statements in the user's program.
This machine code is organized into @dfn{modules} and is located
and @dfn{linked} to the user program. 
@end itemize

Gfortran consists of several components:

@itemize @bullet
@item
A version of the @command{gcc} command
(which also might be installed as the system's @command{cc} command)
that also understands and accepts Fortran source code.
The @command{gcc} command is the @dfn{driver} program for
all the languages in the GNU Compiler Collection (GCC);
With @command{gcc},
you can compiler the source code of any language for
which a front end is available in GCC.

@item
The @command{gfortran} command itself,
which also might be installed as the
system's @command{f95} command.
@command{gfortran} is just another driver program,
but specifically for the Fortran 95 compiler only.
The difference with @command{gcc} is that @command{gfortran}
will automatically link the correct libraries to your program.

@item
A collection of run-time libraries.
These libraries contains the machine code needed to support
capabilities of the Fortran language that are not directly
provided by the machine code generated by the
@command{gfortran} compilation phase,
such as intrinsic functions and subroutines,
and routines for interaction with files and the operating system.
@c and mechanisms to spawn,
@c unleash and pause threads in parallelized code.

@item
The Fortran compiler itself, (@command{f951}).
This is the gfortran parser and code generator,
linked to and interfaced with the GCC backend library.
@command{f951} ``translates'' the source code to
assembler code.  You would typically not use this
program directly;
instead, the @command{gcc} or @command{f951} driver
programs will call it for you.
@end itemize



@c ---------------------------------------------------------------------
@c GFORTRAN and GCC
@c ---------------------------------------------------------------------

@node GFORTRAN and GCC
@chapter GFORTRAN and GCC
@cindex GNU Compiler Collection

GCC used to be the GNU ``C'' Compiler,
but is now known as the @dfn{GNU Compiler Collection}.
GCC provides the GNU system with a very versatile
compiler middle end (shared optimization passes),
and with back ends (code generators) for many different
computer architectures and operating systems.
The code of the middle end and back end are shared by all
compiler front ends that are in the GNU Compiler Collection.

A GCC front end is essentially a source code parser
and a pass to generate a representation of the semantics
of the program in the source code in the GCC language
independent intermediate language,
called @dfn{GENERIC}.

The parser takes a source file written in a
particular computer language, reads and parses it,
and tries to make sure that the source code conforms to
the language rules.
Once the correctness of a program has been established,
the compiler will build a data structure known as the
@dfn{Abstract Syntax tree},
or just @dfn{AST} or ``tree'' for short.
This data structure represents the whole program
or a subroutine or a function.
The ``tree'' is passed to the GCC middle end,
which will perform optimization passes on it,
pass the optimized AST and generate assembly
for the program unit.

Different phases in this translation process can be,
and in fact @emph{are} merged in many compiler front ends.
GNU Fortran 95 has a strict separation between the
parser and code generator.

The default installation of the GNU Compiler Collection
includes a number of fine compiler front ends:

@itemize @bullet
@item
A ``C'' front end, compatible with a number of ``C'' dialects,
including ANSI C99 and good-old K&R ``C'' for some of you
old-timers out there.

@item
A C++ front end with a complete implementation of the
Standard Template Library.

@item
An Objective-C front end
(with work in progress on an Obj-C++ front end).

@item
The GNU Fortran 77 front end @command{g77},
the compiler that, in a way, saved FORTRAN from an
early death.  See @ref{GFORTRAN and G77}

@item
The GNAT Ada 95 front end from Ada Core Technologies.
This is the  @emph{de facto} industry standard Ada compiler,
and it has been integrated in GCC for version 3.1 and up.

@item
A Java (TM) front end that creates byte code
or machine code executables.

@item
An example front end called ``treelang''.
This front end is not shipped with release versions of GCC,
but it does install itself if you use a CVS snapshot.
@end itemize

Many more front ends exist,
including very serious ones like GNU Pascal,
but also many toy front ends,
and front ends used for teaching courses in compiler design.

The goal of the gfortran project is to build a new front end for GCC:
A Fortran 95 front end.
In a non-gfortran installation,
@command{gcc} will not be able to compile Fortran 95 source code
(only the ``C'' front end has to be compiled if you want to build GCC,
all other languages are optional).
If you build GCC with gfortran, @command{gcc} will recognize
@file{.f/.f90/.f95} source files and accepts Fortran 95 specific
command line options.



@c ---------------------------------------------------------------------
@c GFORTRAN and G77
@c ---------------------------------------------------------------------

@node GFORTRAN and G77
@chapter GFORTRAN and G77
@cindex Fortran 77
@cindex G77

Why do we write a compiler front end from scratch? 
There's a fine Fortran 77 compiler in the
GNU Compiler Collection that accepts some features
of the Fortran 90 standard as extensions.
Why not start from there and revamp it?

One of the reasons is that Craig Burley, the author of G77,
has decided to stop working on the G77 front end.
On @uref{http://world.std.com/~burley/g77-why.html,
Craig explains the reasons for his decision to stop working on G77}
in one of the pages in his homepage.
Among the reasons is a lack of interest in improvements to
@command{g77}.
Users appear to be quite satisfied with @command{g77} as it is.
While @command{g77} is still being maintained (by Toon Moene),
it is unlikely that sufficient people will be willing
to completely rewrite the existing code. 

But there are other reasons to start from scratch.
Many people, including Craig Burley,
no longer agreed with certain design decisions in the G77 front end.
Also, the interface of @command{g77} to the back end is written in
a style which is confusing and not up to date on recommended practice.
In fact, a full rewrite had already been planned for GCC 3.0.

When Craig decided to stop,
it just seemed to be a better idea to start a new project from scratch,
because it was expected to be easier to maintain code we
develop ourselves than to do a major overhaul of @command{g77} first,
and then build a Fortran 95 compiler out of it.



@c ---------------------------------------------------------------------
@c Compiling and Testing
@c ---------------------------------------------------------------------

@node Compiling and Testing
@chapter Compiling and Testing

@menu
* General notes about compiling GFORTRAN::
* Compiling GFORTRAN::
* Testing::
@end menu

@node General notes about compiling GFORTRAN
@section General notes about compiling GFORTRAN
@cindex GMP
@cindex Multiple Precision

Compiling gfortran requires the presence of GMP,
the GNU Multiple Precision library version 4.0
or better in order to do its arithmetic.
Download @code{gmp} from your favorite GNU mirror,
configure and compile it.  Your mileage may vary.


@node Compiling GFORTRAN
@section Compiling GFORTRAN
@cindex Make-lang.in

To build gfortran,
you first need to get a copy of the GCC source tree.
gfortran uses the new @dfn{GENERIC} intermediate representation
to communicate with the back end.
This new IR has not been merged yet with the GCC mainline,
so you'll need to get a snapshot of the
@emph{tree-ssa-20020619-branch} from the GCC CVS repository.
You can check out this branch from the GNU Subversions server:

@example
$ cvs -d :pserver:anoncvs@@subversions.gnu.org:/cvsroot/gcc login
(press enter if asked for a password)
$ cvs -z9 -d :pserver:anoncvs@@subversions.gnu.org:/cvsroot/gcc co -r tree-ssa-20020619-branch gcc
@end example

You can now build GCC following the instructions on the
@uref{htpp://gcc.gnu.org/,GCC homepage},
but with the f95 front end enabled
(configure with @option{--enable-languages=f95}).


@node Testing
@section Testing
@cindex Test suite
@cindex Testing

The number of possible Fortran 95 programs is unlimited,
and this means that gfortran has to correctly handle lots of possible inputs.
Whenever you make any changes to the compiler,
you should first test your change on a test program,
then test your change against the gfortran test suite.
In this way, we can be assured that once your fix has been made,
the problem isn't re-introduced at some later time.

The suites are located on Sourceforge in the directory
@file{/home/groups/g/g9/g95/htdocs/test_suite/}.
To get it, just use @command{sftp} to login to your Sourceforge account.
If you don't have a Sourceforge account,
you can get a tar-gzipped copy of the suites by pointing
your browser to @uref{http://g95.sourceforge.net/cgi-bin/send_suite}.

If you wish to add test code,
mail your test code to the gcc-g95 mailing list,
or to one of the individual developers if your test
code is really large.

@c ---------------------------------------------------------------------
@c Project Status
@c ---------------------------------------------------------------------

@node Project Status
@chapter Project Status

@quotation
As soon as gfortran can parse all of the statements correctly,
it will be in the ``larva'' state.
When we generate code, the ``puppa'' state.
When gfortran is done,
we'll see if it will be a beautiful butterfly,
or just a big bug....

--Andy Vaught, April 2000
@end quotation

The start of the GNU Fortran 95 project was announced on
the GCC homepage in March 18, 2000
(even though Andy had already been working on it for a while,
or course).
What is the current status of gfortran?

@menu
* Compiler Status::
* Milestones::
* Proposed Extensions::
@end menu

@node Compiler Status
@section Compiler Status

The Fortran 95 parser is as good as finished,
and most of the type and name resolution phase has been
implemented as well.
This means that @command{gfortran} correctly generates complete syntax
trees from the source files it gets thrown at.
@command{gfortran} does @emph{not} produce executables for the full
Fortran 95 language at this stage,
but we @emph{can} generate code for most statements and expressions.
We are aiming for feature-completeness before GCC 3.5
(probably around Q2 2004). 

The compiler can also produces modules (a @code{.mod}-file).
The @code{.mod}-files do not contain object code,
but they do contain information needed for compiling,
@emph{not linking!},
program units which @code{USE} the module,
i.e. public interfaces, constants, etc.
Those @code{.mod}-files are generated during the parsing stage.
Most commercial compilers generate a @code{.mod}-file for
every module they encounter, and an @code{.o}-file
for every source file.
We plan to do the same.

After the type resolution phase is finished,
the @code{gfc_code} trees are translated to @command{gcc}'s
GENERIC intermediate representation.
The back end then generates first RTL, and later assembly and
object-code from this representation.
The resulting object code will have to be linked against a
library which contains Fortran's intrinsics, I/O-code, etc.
Once all this is finished, you have a working Fortran 95 executable.

Very different parts of a complete Fortran development
framework are missing:

@enumerate
@item Parser
Mostly finished, but some parts are still missing.
Writing the parser is tedious work,
since it is very bug-prone on both the language-side
(understand the standard correctly)
and on the implementation side (build data structures that
contain the actual program's information -- and represent in
a way that is well suited to manipulation of GNU back
end subroutines and macros that generate the back-end
@code{tree} structures).
We would also like to add support for the F programming
language, which is essentially a subset of Fortran 90.
See @ref{Projects}.

@item Back end interface
Work on this interface has only started recently.
The interface translates gfortran's syntax tree to a
data structure from which the back end can generate code.

This is supposedly an easier part of the work.
It implies agreeing on the data layout
(where we can take examples from other compilers),
building the AST and making all this work together.

GCC is moving to a new,
high level intermediate representation
(``GENERIC'', essentially a subset three-code variant of C).
There's some unfinished but good documentation
on @code{tree} structures in the GCC manual,
but these documents appear to be more useful for
architecture hackers than for front end people.

@item The runtime library
This is a large chunk of work,
but big chunks of it can actually be implemented in Fortran,
thus allowing the target audience to contribute
(which supposedly is much more Fortran-savvy than C-savvy),
and allowing greater parallelism in getting this work done;
this also allows for saving us work by taking parts of
SGI's Pro64 Fortran 90 library, under certain circumstances.
@end enumerate


@node Milestones
@section Milestones

``Mainstream'' projects:

@itemize @bullet
@item
Figure out what remaining test suite parse failures are due to bad
Fortran code (@emph{ongoing}, but more people needed. Any volunteers?).

@item
Implement error printing for diagnostics within simplification
functions.

@item
Implement section 14.1.2  Procedure type resolution
rules (@emph{ongoing}).

@item
Reduce the resolution phase error percentage (@emph{ongoing}).

@item
Finish interfacing with GCC (@emph{ongoing}).

@item
Start interfacing with runtime libraries
 -- I/O, math and unix (@emph{ongoing}).

@item
Start work on producing what the I/O libraries lack.
@end itemize


@node Proposed Extensions
@section Proposed Extensions

Here's a list of proposed extensions for @command{gfortran}.
Most of these are necessary to be fully compatible with
existing Fortran compilers,
but they are not part of the official J3 Fortran 95 standard.

@subsection Compiler extensions: 
@itemize @bullet
@item
Flag for suppressing warning messages.

@item
Flag for defining the kind number for default logicals.

@item
-r8 and -i8 options to define default real and integer kinds.

@item
User-specified alignment rules for structures.
@item
Flag to generate a @code{Makefile} info.

@item
Automatically extend single precision constants to double.

@item
Cray pointers (this was high on the @command{g77} wishlist).

@item 
Compile flag to generate code for array bounds checking (similar to
@command{g77}'s -fbounds-check).

@item
Compile code that conserves memory by dynamically allocating common and
module storage either on stack or heap.

@item
Flag to cause the compiler to distinguish between upper and lower case
names.  The Fortran 95 standard does not distinguish them.

@item
Compile switch for changing the interpretation of a backslash from a
character to ``C''-style escape characters.

@item
Compile flag to generate code for array conformance checking (suggest -CC).

@item
Support conditional compilation (i.e. through a preprocessor).

@item
User control of symbol names (underscores, etc).

@item
Compile setting for maximum size of stack frame size before spilling
parts to static or heap.

@item
Flag to force local variables into static space.

@item
Flag to force local variables onto stack.

@item
Flag to compile lines beginning with ``D''.

@item
Flag to ignore lines beginning with ``D''.

@item
Flag for maximum errors before ending compile.

@item
Generate code to check for null pointer dereferences -- prints locus of
dereference instead of segfaulting.  There was some discussion about this
option in the g95 development mailing list.

@item
Allow setting default unit number.

@item
Flag to cause compiler to dump the parse tree in ASCII form.

@item
Option to initialize of otherwise uninitialized integer and floating
point variables.
@end itemize


@subsection Environment Options
@itemize @bullet
@item
Pluggable library modules for random numbers, linear algebra.
LA should use BLAS calling conventions.

@item
Environment variables controlling actions on arithmetic exceptions like
overflow, underflow, precision loss -- Generate NaN, abort, default.
action.

@item
Set precision for fp units that support it (i387).

@item
Variables for setting fp rounding mode.

@item
Support old style namelists ending in $end or &end.

@item
Variable to fill uninitialized variables with a user-defined bit
pattern.

@item
Environment variable controlling filename that is opened for that unit
number.

@item
Environment variable to clear/trash memory being freed.

@item
Environment variable to control tracing of allocations and frees.

@item
Environment variable to display allocated memory at normal program end.

@item
Environment variable for filename for * IO-unit.

@item
Environment variable for temporary file directory.

@item
Environment variable forcing standard output to be line buffered (unix).

@item
Variable for swapping endianness during unformatted read.

@item
Variable for swapping Endianness during unformatted write.
@end itemize



@c ---------------------------------------------------------------------
@c Contributing
@c ---------------------------------------------------------------------

@node Contributing
@chapter Contributing
@cindex Contributing

Free software is only possible if people contribute to efforts
to create it.
We're always in need of more people helping out with ideas
and comments, writing documentation and contributing code.

If you want to contribute to GNU Fortran 95,
have a look at the long lists of projects you can take on.
Some of these projects are small,
some of them are large;
some are completely orthogonal to the rest of what is
happening on @command{gfortran},
but others are ``mainstream'' projects in need of enthusiastic hackers.
All of these projects are important!
We'll eventually get around to the things here,
but they are also things doable by someone who is willing and able.

@menu
* Contributors::
* Projects::
@end menu


@node Contributors
@section Contributors to GNU Fortran 95
@cindex Contributors
@cindex Credits
@cindex Authors

Most of the parser was hand-crafted by @emph{Andy Vaught}, who is
also the initiator of the whole project.  Thanks Andy!
Most of the interface with GCC was written by @emph{Paul Brook}.

The following individuals have contributed code and/or
ideas and significant help to the gfortran project
(in no particular order): 

@itemize @minus
@item Andy Vaught
@item Katherine Holcomb
@item Tobias Schlüter
@item Steven Bosscher
@item Toon Moene
@item Tim Prince
@item Niels Kristian Bech Jensen
@item Steven Johnson
@item Paul Brook
@end itemize

The following people have contributed bug reports,
smaller or larger patches,
and much needed feedback and encouragement for the
@command{gfortran} project: 

@itemize @minus
@item Erik Schnetter
@item Bill Clodius
@item Kate Hedstrom
@end itemize

Many other individuals have helped debug,
test and improve @command{gfortran} over the past two years,
and we welcome you to do the same!
If you already have done so,
and you would like to see your name listed in the
list above, please feel free to mail the project maintainer.
@c TODO: fill in maintainer email


@node Projects
@section Projects

@table @emph

@item Help build the test suite
Solicit more code for donation to the test suite.
We can keep code private on request.

@item Bug hunting/squishing
Find bugs and write more test cases!
Test cases are especially very welcome,
because it allows us to concentrate on fixing bugs
instead of isolating them.

@item Smaller projects (``bug'' fixes):
  @itemize @minus
  @item Allow init exprs to be numbers raised to integer powers.
  @item Implement correct rounding
  @item Implement F restrictions on Fortran 95 syntax.
  @item See about making Emacs-parsable error messages.
  @end itemize
@end table

If you wish to work on the runtime libraries,
please contact a project maintainer.
@c TODO: email!


@c ---------------------------------------------------------------------
@c Standards
@c ---------------------------------------------------------------------

@node Standards
@chapter Standards
@cindex Standards

The GNU Fortran 95 Compiler aims to be a conforming implementation of
ISO/IEC 1539:1997 (Fortran 95).

In the future it may also support other variants and extensions to the Fortran
language.  This includes ANSI Fortran 77, Fortran 90, Fortran 2000 (not yet
finalized), and OpenMP.

@node Index
@unnumbered Index

@printindex cp

@bye
